Expand README (#21)
OpenBB-finance/copilot-for-terminal-pro: README.md

# Bring your own Copilot to Terminal Pro

> Welcome to the example repository for integrating a custom copilot into the OpenBB Terminal Pro!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Welcome to the example repository for integrating a custom copilot into the OpenBB Terminal!
```

> This guide provides everything you need to create and add your own custom copilots, enhancing the capabilities of Terminal Pro in a way that fits your unique requirements.

Reviewer: Delete.

## Overview

> To integrate a custom copilot, you'll need to create a backend that interacts with Terminal Pro. Terminal Pro will send requests to your copilot, which will respond accordingly via Server-Sent Events ([SSEs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Server-sent_events/Using_server-sent_events)). This ensures real-time responses and seamless communication between Terminal Pro and your custom copilot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To integrate a custom copilot, you'll need to create a custom copilot backend that OpenBB Terminal connects to. OpenBB Terminal will send requests to your backend, which will respond with various Server-Sent Events ([SSEs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Server-sent_events/Using_server-sent_events)).
```

This guide will cover:

- Understanding the message and context structure
- How to handle function calls and interact with widgets
- Explanation of the copilot configuration (copilots.json)

> - Examples of common use cases and scenarios

Reviewer: Delete.

(The user will encounter this organically -- or we can just add a table of contents).

## Requirements for Compatibility

> Custom copilots are expected to follow the defined schema for queries, SSE responses, and function calling. These requirements ensure seamless integration with OpenBB Terminal Pro.

Reviewer: Delete.

> ## How Terminal Pro submits requests to your Copilot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How OpenBB Terminal submits requests to your Copilot
```

> Terminal Pro will submit POST requests to your custom copilot's `/v1/query` endpoint. These requests will contain information such as the user's message  (`messages`), any additional `context`, `widgets` data, user-uploaded files (`user_files`), relevant URLs (`urls`), and more. Your copilot must respond via SSEs for real-time interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using a custom copilot, OpenBB Terminal will make POST requests to your custom copilot's `/v1/query` endpoint. These requests will contain information such as the current conversation's messages, any explicitly-added context, information about widgets on the currently-active dashboard, URLs to retrieve, etc.
```

### API Request Schema Example

```json
{
  "messages": [
    {
      "role": "human",
      "content": "Hi there. Who are you?"
    }
  ],
  "context": null,
  "widgets": [],

>   "urls": []

Reviewer: These should be filled out to show the schema.

}
```

> - messages: The chat history, including both user and assistant messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- messages: The chat history, including both user and assistant messages as well as function calls and function call results.
```

> - context: Structured context to include additional information like personal data or metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- context: widgets that have been added as explicit context by the user.
```

- widgets: A list of widgets currently in use by the user for function calling.

> - user_files: UUIDs of uploaded files.

Reviewer: Delete `user_files`.

> - urls: A list of URLs for web search functionality.

Reviewer: Mention that this is optional.

**Note:** Terminal Pro makes requests to this endpoint each time the user interacts with the copilot.

## How the Copilot Responds

> Your custom copilot must respond to Terminal Pro's request using Server-Sent Events (SSEs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your custom copilot must respond to OpenBB Copilot's request using Server-Sent Events (SSEs).
```

> Here's a breakdown of how your copilot can respond:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenBB Terminal accepts the following SSEs:

<list each of them with a high-level description>
```

Sending a `copilotMessageChunk` Event

> The copilotMessageChunk event is used to stream back generated tokens (partial responses) to Terminal Pro. These responses are streamed as they are generated, providing a seamless experience to the use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `copilotMessageChunk` event is used to return streamed copilot tokens (partial responses) back to OpenBB Terminal. These responses can be streamed as they are generated.
```

``` json
{
  "event": "copilotMessageChunk",
  "data": {
    "delta": "<token>"
  }
}
```

> These delta values are streamed by Terminal Pro to form the final message.

Reviewer: Delete.

> ## Adding Function Calling to your Custom Copilot

Reviewer: You'll need to talk about the various function calls that Terminal currently supports (for now, just the one -- `get_widget_data`).

> ## Adding Function Calling to your Custom Copilot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Function calling
```

If your copilot needs to request data (e.g., widget data) or perform a specific function, you will emit a copilotFunctionCall event. This instructs Terminal Pro to take further action on the client's side.

Function Call Example `copilotFunctionCall`:

```json
{
  "event": "copilotFunctionCall",
  "data": {
    "function": "get_widget_data",
    "input_arguments": {

>       "widget_uuid": "c276369e-e469-4689-b5fe-3f8c76f7c45a"

Reviewer: Where does the user get this `widget_uuid` ?

Think about what a user would need to know!

    }
  }
}
```

### Handling Function Calls in Your Copilot

Once a function call is required, the copilot should send a copilotFunctionCall event. Terminal Pro will execute the specified function and return the result. You must handle these function calls correctly to continue the conversation.

For example, if your copilot requests widget data:

- Emit the copilotFunctionCall SSE.
- Wait for Terminal Pro to provide the result.
- Include the result in subsequent responses to complete the flow.

> **Note:** The copilot must also include the function call response in any further requests to maintain context.

Reviewer: You'll need to explain this accurately and correctly.

Terminal makes a follow-up request, containing the function call result and the function call in the `messages`.

I suggest opening your console and inspecting what happens so you understand the flow. The developer implementing this will need to be aware of how everything works.

> ## Understanding the Copilot Configuration (copilots.json)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Components of a custom copilot
```

List them out. Put it as one of the first sections.

- `description`: A short description of your copilot.
- `image`: A URL to an image representing your copilot. This image will be displayed in the Terminal Pro interface.
- `hasStreaming`: A boolean value indicating if the copilot supports streaming responses via SSEs. If set to `true`, Terminal Pro will expect the copilot to return responses in real-time chunks.
- `hasFunctionCalling`: A boolean value indicating if the copilot supports function calling. If set to `true`, Terminal Pro will be able to make specific function calls such as retrieving widget data or accessing client-side resources.
- `hasDocuments`: A boolean value indicating if the copilot supports processing documents, such as user-uploaded files. If set to `false`, document processing features will not be available for this copilot.
- `endpoints`: A set of URLs that Terminal Pro will use to interact with your copilot. In this example:
  - `query`: The URL for the main endpoint where Terminal Pro sends user queries (POST requests). This endpoint is where your copilot listens for incoming messages and responds accordingly.

> ## Example Scenarios and Use Cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Examples requests and responses
```

> ### Requesting Widget Data

Reviewer: Start with the simplest case! Just a regular conversation with Copilot on an empty dashboard.

If a user asks, "What is the current stock price of AAPL?" , Terminal Pro will send the active widgets in your dashboard alongside your query. Your copilot can then emit a `copilotFunctionCall` to retrieve this data if there is a widget that can provide the information.

Request:

```json
{
  "messages": [
    {
      "role": "human",
      "content": "What is the current stock price of AAPL?"
    }
  ],
  "widgets": [
    {
      "uuid": "c276369e-e469-4689-b5fe-3f8c76f7c45a",
      "name": "stock price quote widget",
      "description": "Contains the current stock price of a ticker",
      "metadata": {
        "ticker": "AAPL"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Copilot Response:

```json
{
  "event": "copilotFunctionCall",
  "data": {
    "function": "get_widget_data",
    "input_arguments": {
      "widget_uuid": "c276369e-e469-4689-b5fe-3f8c76f7c45a"
    }
  }
}
```

> ### Including Explicit Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Handling specific context
```

This should be the first example after the basic conversation.

> # Bring your own Copilot to Terminal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Bring your own Copilot to OpenBB Terminal
```

Welcome to the example repository for integrating custom copilots into the OpenBB Terminal.

This repository provides everything you need to build and add your own custom
copilots to OpenBB Copilot.

Here are a few common reasons why you might want to build your own copilot:
- You have a unique data source that you don't want to add as a custom integration to OpenBB Terminal.
- You want to use a specific LLM.
- You want to use a local LLM.
- You want a Copilot that is self-hosted on your infrastructure.
- You are running on-premise in a locked-down environment that doesn't allow data to leave your VPC.

## Overview

> To integrate a custom copilot, you'll need to create a custom API backend that
> OpenBB Terminal connects to. OpenBB Terminal will make requests to your backend, allowing you to interact with your custom copilot from Terminal Pro.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To integrate a custom Copilot that you can interact with from the OpenBB Terminal, you'll need to create a backend API that the terminal can make requests to.
```

Your custom API backend will respond with Server-Sent Events
([SSEs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Server-sent_events/Using_server-sent_events)).

**Note: If you're looking to get started
quickly, we suggest running one of the example copilots included as part of
this repository, and adding it as a custom copilot to OpenBB Terminal (each example copilot includes instructions on how to run them). Cloning and modifying an example copilot is a great way to build a custom copilot.**

> ## The copilot protocol is stateless

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The Copilot protocol is stateless
```

The most important concept to understand is that the copilot protocol is
_stateless_.  This means that every request from OpenBB Terminal to your copilot
will include all previous messages (such as AI completions, human messages,
function calls, and function call results) in the request payload.

This means it is not necessary for your custom copilot to maintain any state
between requests. It can simply use the request payload to generate a response.

OpenBB Terminal is responsible for maintaining the conversation state, and will
append the responses to the `messages` array in the request payload. You can
choose how much of the conversation you want your custom copilot to generate a
response to, but typically you'd respond to the entire conversation history.

We recommend that you do not maintain any conversational state in your copilot,

> and simply respond to the entire conversation history.

Reviewer 2: I found this section confusing.

The responses will update the initial message chain received in the payload with responses, it sounds that we are editing the payload of the request.

On choosing "how much of the conversation you want your custom copilot to generate a
response to", makes it sound like there's a setting to choose how much of the message chain will be considered, but it's very specific to the implementation. Think it's too specific for the README.

      "name": "Financial Ratios Widget",
      "description": "Displays key financial ratios for a company",
      "metadata": {
        "ticker": "AAPL",
        "period": "TTM"
      }
    },
    ...
  ],
  ...
}
```

## Response Schema

Your custom copilot must respond to OpenBB Terminal's request using Server-Sent Events (SSEs).

OpenBB Terminal can process the following SSEs:

- `copilotMessageChunk`: Used to return streamed copilot tokens (partial responses) back to OpenBB Terminal. These responses can be streamed as they are generated.
- `copilotFunctionCall`: Used to request data (e.g., widget data) or perform a specific function. This instructs Terminal Pro to take further action on the client's side. This is only necessary if you're planning on implementing function calling in your custom copilot.

#### `copilotMessageChunk`
The message chunk SSE has the following format:

```
event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":"H"}  # <-- the `data` field must be a JSON object.
```
The `delta` must be a string, but can be of any length. We suggest streaming
back each chunk you receive from your LLM as soon as it's generated as a `delta`.

> For example, if you wanted to stream back the message "Hi", you would send the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you wanted to stream back the message "Hi!", you would send the
```

following SSEs:

```
event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":"H"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":"i"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":"!"}
```

#### `copilotFunctionCall` (only required for function calling)
The function call SSE has the following format:

```
event: copilotFunctionCall
data: {"function":"get_widget_data","input_arguments":{"widget_uuid":"c276369e-e469-4689-b5fe-3f8c76f7c45a"}}
```

Again, the `data` field must be a JSON object. The `function` field is the name

> of the function to be called (currently only `get_widget_data` is supported),

Reviewer 2: What about `get_direct_retrieval_data`?

Reviewer: This is currently not supported on custom copilots (but it's something we can add -- although I'm not sure how many users would want this, since they'll already have access to the data sources directly on their machine, and so could make a request to the data directly). 

We'll need to modify the way OpenBB Copilot works first to make sure things are compatible. For example, we'll need to fetch the built-in `widgets.json` dynamically on start-up, so that custom copilots can follow the same behaviour.

is visible on a user's currently-active dashboard in OpenBB Terminal.

A list of all widgets currently visible on a user's dashboard is sent to your
copilot in the `widgets` array of the request payload.

To retrieve the data from a widget, your copilot should respond with a
`copilotFunctionCall` event, specifying the widget UUID:

```
event: copilotFunctionCall
data: {"function":"get_widget_data","input_arguments":{"widget_uuid":"c276369e-e469-4689-b5fe-3f8c76f7c45a"}}
```

After emitting a `copilotFunctionCall` event, you must close the connection and wait for a new query request from OpenBB Terminal.

When a `copilotFunctionCall` event is received, OpenBB Terminal will retrieve
the data, and initiate a **new** query request. This new query request will
include the original function call, as well as the function call result in the
`messages` array.

```python
{
  ...
  "messages": [
    ...
    {
      "role": "ai",
      "content": "{\"function\":\"get_widget_data\",\"input_arguments\":{\"widget_uuid\":\"c276369e-e469-4689-b5fe-3f8c76f7c45a\"}}"
    },
    {
      "role": "tool",
      "function": "get_widget_data",

>       "content": "",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

      }
    } 
  ],
  "widgets": [
    {
      "uuid": "38181a68-9650-4940-84fb-a3f29c8869f3",
      "name": "Historical Stock Price",
      "description": "Historical Stock Price",
      "metadata": {
        "symbol": "AAPL",
        "source": "Financial Modelling Prep",
        "lastUpdated": 1728994470324
      }
    }
}
```

You then parse the response, process the data, and format the messages to your LLM. Let's assume that the LLM then generates a string of tokens to answer the user's query. These are then streamed back to the user using the `copilotMessageChunk` SSE:

```
event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":"The"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" current"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" stock"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" price"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" of"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" Apple"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" Inc."}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" (AAPL)"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" is"}

event: copilotMessageChunk
data: {"delta":" $150.75."}
```

## Configuring your custom copilot for OpenBB Terminal (`copilots.json`)

> To integrate your custom copilot with Terminal Pro, you need to configure and a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To integrate your custom copilot with OpenBB Terminal, you need to configure and a
```

serve a `copilots.json` file. This file defines how your custom copilot connects

> with Terminal Pro, including which features it supports and where requests

Author: OpenBB Terminal

> To integrate your custom copilot with Terminal Pro, you need to configure and a
> serve a `copilots.json` file. This file defines how your custom copilot connects
> with Terminal Pro, including which features it supports and where requests
> should be sent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To integrate your custom copilot with OpenBB Terminal, you need to configure and serve a `copilots.json` file. This file defines how your custom copilot connects
with the frontend, including which features it supports and where requests
should be sent.
```

Terminal Pro. This repository provides reference implementations to help you
create and add your own custom copilots to enhance the capabilities of Terminal
Pro.

## Requirements for Compatibility

Custom copilots are expected to follow the defined schema for queries, SSE responses, and function calling. These requirements ensure seamless integration with OpenBB Terminal Pro.

> ### Query Endpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How Terminal Pro submits requests to your Copilot
```

Reviewer: I think start with this first -- explain that Terminal Pro will submit POST requests to the `/v1/query` endpoint, and that your custom copilot must respond with SSEs. 

Link to the MDN docs for SSEs (since devs might not be familiar with it).

Custom copilots should expose a `/v1/query` endpoint that accepts POST requests. The request body should include a list of `messages` and, optionally, `context`, `widgets`, `user_files`, and `urls`.

**Request Example:**

```json
{
  "messages": [
    {
      "role": "human",
      "content": "Hi there. Who are you?"
    }
  ],
  "context": null,
  "widgets": [],
  "urls": []
}
```

* messages: The chat history, including both user and assistant messages.
* context: Structured context to include additional information like personal data or metadata.
* widgets: A list of widgets currently in use by the user for function calling.
* user_files: UUIDs of uploaded files.

> * urls: A list of URLs for web search functionality.

Reviewer: Put this under a header "API Request Schema".

## Server-Sent Events (SSEs)

The copilot must stream its response via SSEs, with two primary event types: `copilotMessageChunk` and `copilotFunctionCall`.

### `copilotMessageChunk` Event

This event streams partial responses (tokens) back to the client as they are generated.

Event Schema:

```json
{
  "event": "copilotMessageChunk",
  "data": {
    "delta": "<token>"
  }
}
```

### `copilotFunctionCall` Event

This event indicates that the copilot requires a function call, typically for retrieving data from the client or widgets.

Event Schema:

```json
{
  "event": "copilotFunctionCall",
  "data": {
    "function": "<function_name>",
    "input_arguments": {
      "<argument_name>": "<value>"
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: This should come under the "Function calling" section.

> ## Function Calling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adding Function Calling to your Custom Copilot
```

Custom copilots can request data from widgets or perform operations on client-side resources. Function calls are returned as a single SSE event and include the function name and any required arguments.

Function Call Example:

```json
{
  "function": "get_widget_data",
  "input_arguments": {
    "widget_uuid": "c276369e-e469-4689-b5fe-3f8c76f7c45a"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Here you should explain how to emit a `copilotFunctionCall` SSE.

Author: Can you help me on this one? This can be very brief or too detailed and I can't seem to get a nice balance.

The function call response must then be included in subsequent queries to complete the flow.

### SSE Parsing

Clients must parse the SSEs and concatenate message chunks to form the full response. For function calls, clients should execute the requested function and include the result in the next API request.

```python
def handle_stream(response):
    for chunk in response.iter_text():
        if "event: copilotMessageChunk" in chunk:
            delta = ast.literal_eval(chunk.split("data: ")[1])["delta"]
            print(delta, end='', flush=True)
        elif "event: copilotFunctionCall" in chunk:
            function_call = ast.literal_eval(chunk.split("data: ")[1])

>             print(function_call)

Reviewer: This is irrelevant, since they won't be writing a client.
